---
layout: post
title: "My experience with game jams"
date:   2024-05-10 10:30:00 +0100
categories: gamedev
---

When I was a student working for my bachelor's degree I participated in
game jam events a few times. It all started when a classmate suggested
checking out presentations by industry veterans at C-Mine in Genk. These
talks were part of the Global Game Jam event, where teams create a game
in just 48 hours.

# Global Game Jam 2014

I went for the presentations and stayed for the jam, it was decided in
the spur of the moment. The atmosphere was infectious, filled with
camaraderie and creativity, making it an easy choice for me to jump in.

As the event kicked off, a theme is revealed, around which participants
make their game. On our jamsite, teams are divided by first letting
everyone brainstorm game ideas around the theme, then everyone decides
which idea they like the best, at which point participants are grouped
by their preferred idea. Around the theme \"We don\'t see things as they
are, we see them as we are\", someone at our jamsite came up with the
idea: "the protagonist is an evil entity that has grown remorseful and
wants to kill themselves, this is not easy however, them being very
powerful", *I wonder what that person was going through at the time*.
Many participants liked the idea, so much that two groups were formed
from that idea, one of which I was a member, and there were about 6
groups in total. Each group had about 5-6 members.

And so began the jam, we started coordinating our efforts, took breaks
by playing some games (the jamsite featured a PS2 where you could play
Simpsons: Hit and Run, and a PS4 where you could play Don't Starve), we
helped ourselves to complimentary soda and water, we were jamming
alright.

When the first day came to an end some people retired to the sleeping
area, but not me, I decided to work through the night along with one or
two other team members. This was a regretful decision, I was almost
completely useless the next day, at least I got most of the work done
during nighttime.

Then came the conclusion of the jam, the time had run out, and now it
was time to present our game to the on-site judges. Our game was OK
considering the team consisted of only beginners, I'm not sure exactly
what place we ended up in, I think we were second to last out of the six
on-site teams. We learned and had fun at least.

![My team for Global Game Jam 2014](/assets/img/my_experience_with_game_jams/image1.jpeg)*My team for Global Game Jam 2014*

[https://v3.globalgamejam.org/2014/games/demons-remorse](https://v3.globalgamejam.org/2014/games/demons-remorse)

# Ludum Dare 30

Global Game Jam 2014 was such a nice experience I decided to also
participate in that year's Ludum Dare in August 2014 as well. This event
is a little different, participation isn't on-site but through their web
portal, you could enter in the 72 hour 'jam' with a team, or the 48 hour
'compo' as a solo developer. I decided to enter the compo as a solo
developer. What wasn't different is the usage of a theme that is
revealed at the start of the event, the theme for this jam was
"connected worlds".

When participating solo there is much less coordination involved, you
just start working on your game. It also didn't take very long to come
up with an idea for a game that would fit the theme. But that doesn't
make up for the fact that you also have to make the game look decent by
yourself, I was only a programmer at that point so it was a challenge to
say the least. I realised this early on and decided to focus on the
gameplay, my reasoning being that spending time on making the game look
decent would drain too much time and there was no guarantee I would even
succeed.

After toiling on my game for 48 hours, "Danger Zones" had been
manifested. I was proud of the result, the game wasn't much to look at,
but the gameplay was decent, which is also generally what fellow
participants posted as their feedback. And as you might already know, I
continued working on "Danger Zones" after the event, so LD30 helped me
start on an actual game that I would later release. You can find out
more about the status of "Danger Zones" on its website:
[https://dangerzonesgame.com](https://dangerzonesgame.com/).

A while ago I went to find the entry page for "Danger Zones" because I
wanted to see it again, I managed to find it and also wrote a blogpost
about it on the "Danger Zones" website, go ahead and take a look:
![Screenshot of Danger Zones' entry page on the old Ludum Dare website](/assets/img/my_experience_with_game_jams/image2.png)*Screenshot of Danger Zones' entry page on the old Ludum Dare website*

[https://dangerzonesgame.com/2024/04/12/danger-zones-entry-page-of-ld30/](https://dangerzonesgame.com/2024/04/12/danger-zones-entry-page-of-ld30/)

# Global Game Jam 2015

Round 2 baby! I was excited to participate in another Global Game Jam,
last year's edition was a good time. So you know the drill, when the
theme is revealed, ideas are brainstormed and groups are formed. This
year the theme was "What do we do now?", my group was formed around the
idea: "A defunct family's internet connection goes down, so now they
have to interact with each other somehow". The working title was quickly
decided upon: "Fucking Telenet" (Telenet is a Belgian telecom provider).

And off we went, the jam was on. Things went more smoothly this time
around, my team members weren't beginners in the field of game design,
and I was a half decent programmer with some Unity experience, albeit
the only programmer in the team. What soon became apparent is that this
team operated on a higher level than last year's team, I was stoked.

One problem we had was that our idea was too open ended "they (the
family) have to interact with each other somehow", it took some time to
figure out what that actually meant. Eventually we decided to let the
player find specific objects to bring to family members around the
family's house.

![Concept art of my team's game:"Fucking Telenet"](/assets/img/my_experience_with_game_jams/image3.png)*Concept art of my team's game:"Fucking Telenet"*

Aside from that things went pretty well,
the site coordinators took notice that we were further along with our
game than other groups and asked if we could record some gameplay for
the local news, we happily obliged. I can still find some articles about
our GGJ 2015 jamsite, but not the news broadcast, I did however find the
video that we submitted (for some reason it stutters a bit).

<video width="320" height="240" controls>
  <source src="/assets/vid/connection_lost_gameplay.webm" type="video/webm">
</video>

[Limburgs spel over internetverslaving wint Global Game Jam - Het Laatste Nieuws (dutch)](https://www.hln.be/genk/limburgs-spel-over-internetverslaving-wint-global-game-jam~ac017e96/)

[Global Game Jam 2015 leverde meer dan 5000 games op - 4Gamers (dutch)](https://www.4gamers.be/nieuws/42615/1/Global-Game-Jam-2015-leverde-meer-dan-5000-games-op)

This time I made sure to get a good night's sleep in order to still be
useful the second day, last year I stayed up all night thinking I would
get more work done, but being sleep deprived while still having to
develop part of a game sucks. Needless to say that getting some sleep
yielded a much better experience.

![My team working hard during the Global Game Jam 2015 session](/assets/img/my_experience_with_game_jams/image4.jpeg)*My team working hard during the Global Game Jam 2015 session*

<https://v3.globalgamejam.org/2015/games/connection-lost>

The jam ran its course and now it's judgement time. We were happy with
our result, except the 3D environment modeler, his PC had crashed while
rendering the static lighting for the scene, and now we had to use the
low resolution static lighting texture which looked pixelated (the
render would've taken at least half a day). But it didn't matter, the
judges were enamoured with our combination of 2D characters and 3D
environment and crowned "Connection Lost" the winner of our jamsite!
Winner winner chicken dinner üèÜ, there were some challenges but things
worked out, we had a blast.

# In conclusion

All three jams I participated in were a fun and rewarding experience, I
highly recommend participating if you are passionate about game
development, no matter what aspect. The in-person on-site events are the
best in my opinion, you can rely on team members for the stuff you can't
do yourself, maybe even contact them later on to work together on
something else. This is what I did, but not much came of it because my
game development journey got sidetracked in favour of my programming
career, but that's a story for another time.

## Many years later...

Game development will always be something I like doing, in the meantime
I have been learning how to make my own game assets as well, and I have
been applying that skill to work on my debut game "Danger Zones", it
currently looks much better since its creation during LD30.
Participating in game jams might not always start a dedicated game
developer career, but it will lower the threshold for anything game dev
related you will do later.
